---
title: Fundamental database concepts
emoji: "\U0001F30F"
tags:
  - database
link: null
created: 2021-02-08T06:32:50.000Z
modified: 2021-05-05T22:03:31.000Z
---

## What is a database?

A collection of data organized in such a way that a computer can efficiency store and retrieve data.

## Why use a database?

Leverage and process data more efficiently.

- a transaction is an atomic unit of interaction between user and database

## What is a relational database?

- A collection of relations, often just called tables.
- A relation schema is the set of attribute names and the domain(data type) for each attribute name
- pros: lack of redundancy,fast access
- a balance between space (lack of redundancy) and speed (fast access to data)
- many relations leads to lower redundancy, but more joins(slow speed)
- fewer relations leads to fewer joins (slow speed) but greater redundancy (and integrity problems)

- base on hierarchical model
  - efficient storage, but limited expressiveness
  - the network model was used to overcome lack of expressiveness in hierarchical databases-> highly complex database system
  - the deductive model is an active research-> store rules
- relational operators
  - project
  - restrict
  - join

## Why does spatial data present problems for relational databases?

## What is object-orientation, and how is it relevant to databases?

This is especially useful for spatial data

## DB Development

- a conceptual data model is independent of implementation details
  - provide a means for communication
  - aid the design of the system
  - provide basic reference material for implemented system
- Entity relationship model
  - many-to-many
  - many-to-one
  - one-to-one
- convert each entity into a relation
- convert each relationship into a relation

## Object-orientation

- aim to minimize information lost
  - attributes
  - operations
  - classes
- 4 features
  - reduces complexity->simple
  - combats information lost
  - promotes reuse->more efficient
  - metaphorical power->close to physical objects
- encapsulation: hide internal mechanisms of their behavior from the external access to that behavior
